# The use of Machine Learning Methods for Improved Disaster Management and Responce Throughout Haiti
by Brooke Lamoureux

April 5, 2020

## Introduction

The purpose of this research is to advance the use of different post-disaster management techniques in low-income countries such as Haiti. By estimating, specifying, and analyzing cell phone SIM card movements, social media 3-T frameworks, and automatic object-oriented techniques, just to name a few, researchers and rescuers alike will be able to decrease the mortality rate of Haitians following natural disasters. Though traditional methods worked well for a long period of time, they lacked the ability to prioritize data that flowed in from outside sources, which is crucial being that Haiti is the least developed country in the Western Hemisphere. I will achieve the goals of increasing response time post-disaster and becoming more prepared pre-disaster using methods such as:
  1. The use of automatic mapping to measure infrastructure damage to provide rapid assessments of building damage. 
  2. Estimate the magnitude of population movements after the Haiti 2010 earthquake.
  3. Connect responders on the ground to all information available around the world so they can respond accordingly to how,     when, and where supply resources need to be distributed. 

This work will build on previous traditional methods of response that were time and labor-intensive and only circulated information among a small number of researchers. This method has proved to be effective for a number of years but as the risk of more dangerous natural disasters continues to grow, building upon these techniques with the use of methods mentioned previously will save more lives in low-income countries such as Haiti. 

## Human Development Topic

Haiti has suffered from many natural disasters in its’ history. Form earthquakes to diseases and hurricanes, Haiti has been put through the wringer. Over 31,600 Haitians lost their lives or have yet to be found after the monstrous 2010 earthquake. Why is it that low-income countries such as Haiti feel the rath of natural disasters so harshly? Researchers have reason to believe that calculating death tolls after a disaster has already happened can calculate the number of rescue supplies needed, but, does nothing to prevent the amount of damage a natural disaster can do on a low-income country. Studies have found that there are new data science methods that could contribute greatly to the idea of prevention rather than forgiveness. Methods such as analyzing the movement of cell phone SIM cards, social media outlets such as Ushahidi, and remote sensing technology are all machine learning techniques that have proved to detect some sort of algorithm that can aid countries when responding, and trying to defend against natural disasters. While natural disasters are uncontrollable, research has proven that there are modern machine learning techniques that can be analyzed to decrease the death toll, and improve the safety of citizens living in low-income countries. 

Amartya  Sen defines human development as “The enhancement of freedoms that allow people to lead lives that they have reason to value” (Sen, 1999). The reason for this research and literature review is not to simply decrease the number of deaths in Haiti after a natural disaster, it is to consider every single number as human life, and every single life is a life worth living. Sen argues that there is too much emphasis on GDP as a measure of development. In this research, GDP can be compared to the mortality rate post-disaster. While this number is important for analysis, what’s more important is the idea that everyone’s lives have meaning and no one deserves to go through life without some kind of security that they will not survive a natural disaster. This research again describes how some modern technologies have proven to increase human development and quality of life through disaster management and response. 

Being a low-income country has many different meanings and levels. “Wealth is a relative term, however, and the Haitian peasant is so poor that by contrast a few hundred dollars’ income a year will seem like riches” (Lundahl, 2011, pg. 108). Haiti is very poor. They have very little money circulating through their economic system which means they need help from the rest of the world when it comes to disaster management and relief. When disaster strikes, Haiti needs help from around the world as fast as possible. One method used by volunteers around the world is the social media outlet known as Ushahidi. Ushahidi can provide reports of trapped people, medical emergencies, and specific needs such as food, water, and shelter. The information gathered is combined with geographic information and is available to anyone with an internet connection. Responders on the ground can now be connected to all information available and respond accordingly to how, when, and where supply resources need to be distributed. 

## Human Development Process

During the testing and analysis of different disease management and response techniques, there were many agents involved. Agents including the 3-T framework. The 3-T framework illustrates three different boundaries: syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic, each represents a different milestone of information. Traditional knowledge management systems (KMS) make it difficult to understand these boundaries since it is very manual. Using the 3-T framework, we can measure the amount of information being communicated across specific boundaries, leading to a positive increase in disaster management and response. One particular user of the 3-T framework includes social media outlet Ushahidi, mentioned earlier. “The platform could be considered ‘social’ as it provided several key functions of social media: it allowed web pages to be created ‘on the fly’ by anyone on the team… Further, all contributions were tagged with the contributor's name and contact information. Anyone who had a comment or additional information would know exactly who to contact for more information, or how to contextualize their response if they had information to share” (Yates, & Paquette, 2011). 

There are also 2 different processes for detecting earthquake damage: mono-temporal and multi-temporal. The mono-temporal approach is especially used when attempting to provide an effective emergency extraction of earthquake damage. It does not depend on how available pre-earthquake imagery is. One method of a mono-temporal approach is called support vector selection and adaptation. This method detects damaged regions from a post-earthquake image. The SVSA method uses support vectors from linear support vector machines. There are two stages to this method: selection and adaptation. First, in the selection stage, the linear SVM deployed to get the support vectors from the original training data. The support vector data is then classified with the training data with the K nearest neighbor algorithm created by Cover and Hart in 1967. In the adaptation stage, the remaining reference vector data are adapted to fit other training data and make them ready for classification and the nearest neighbor rule. The adaptation of data is obtained by using the Learning Vector Quantization algorithm. In a multi-temporal approach, damage and change can be detected through the analysis of registered multispectral remote sensing images acquired from the same geographical area and two different times. For example, Rathje deployed a semi-automatic thematic algorithm that identified damage patterns based on pre- and post-earthquake high-resolution images. A disadvantage of a multi-temporal approach using change detection could be something as simple as brightness values or a certain time gap between image timestamps.

## Geospatial Data Science Methods

In one particular research study written by Thi-Thanh-Hiên Pham and colleagues brings to light the use of optical images (15cm of spatial resolution) combined with height data (LiDAR, 1m of spatial resolution) to measure building damage throughout the capital, Port-au-Prince, after the earthquake. This data was organized into three categories of destruction: intact buildings, collapsed buildings, and debris. Through the use of this automatic object-oriented technique, the amount of damage done to each building is measured immediately and proved to be very reliable. The accuracy of classification varied from 70- 79 percent. There were various reasons for error including limited spectral information of the optical images, resolution difference between the two data, high density of buildings but most importantly, certain types of building collapses could not be detected by vertically taken images. The automatic damage mapping strategy discussed in this article could absolutely be used in emergency situations. The entire process took approximately 15 hours, which is much faster than any semi- or fully automatic technique that has been proposed in the past. Semi-automatic techniques are based on visual interpretations of images and are very time and labor-intensive. Automatic damage mapping could be combined with manual visual interpretation to increase and accelerate response times of humanitarian rescues and resources.

One geospatial data science method that was used after the 2010, 7.0 magnitude earthquake in Haiti was the use of cell phone SIM cards to track the movement of populations after the devastation. “We followed daily positions of SIM cards 42 days before the earthquake and 158 days after … We used this ratio to extrapolate from the number of moving SIM cards to the number of moving persons” (Bengtsson, 2011) Results from SIM card tracking were compared to results gained from the Haitian National Civil Protection Agency and their post-earthquake survey. The HNCPA survey included 2,500 households averaging 4.9 persons. The survey asked questions such as “Did you leave the metropolitan area after January 12 (earthquake day) even if it was for a short time?” and “to what department (province) did you go to?” This survey conducted by the HNCPA is subject to individual interpretation. For comparison, the SIM card tracking method was much more effective and efficient. It produced results within a day. By tracking the movement of people from their original location to their location after the earthquake, rescuers were able to pinpoint exactly where to get supplies, making disaster management and response much faster. The previous use of survey data proves to be less effective than the modern approach of SIM card tracking.

## Discussion

Throughout this research process, I have learned many things and have a good idea about what Haiti, among many other low-income countries that should follow suit, should do if they want to improve their quality of life and defense against natural disasters. I have read and analyzed many areas that need to be improved upon including but not limited to infrastructure buildings and traditional post-disaster survey methods. I have also analyzed various methods that can be put in place to improve some of these shortfalls for future disaster management including cell phone SIM card movements, social media 3-T frameworks, and automatic object-oriented techniques, just to name a few. Natural disasters such as earthquakes cannot be controlled, but the steps taken after them can be, and it is the world’s job to aid and assist low-income countries such as Haiti when figuring the right methods to put in place for future disasters. 

Though much information was gathered, it is not all perfect, and there are gaps, as well as possible errors in some eperiments. For example in the study of optical images (15cm of spatial resolution) combined with height data (LiDAR, 1m of spatial resolution) measuring building damage (done by Thi-Thanh-Hiên Pham and colleagues in 2010), 
there were various reasons for error including limited spectral information of the optical images, resolution difference between the two data, high density of buildings but most importantly, certain types of building collapses could not be detected by vertically taken images. Despite the possible errors, however, the results still proved to be more effective than traditional methods. 

One gap that proved to hinder was the use of these methods in a more “modern” light. While I am glad Haiti hasn’t had an earthquake as devastating as the one in 2010, these methods were all tested in 2010 and haven’t quite been tested otherwise. The methods are still though to be modern, considering Haiti hasn’t been hit by another of this magnitude since then, but I’m sure these methods will complement and work side by side along with newer methods in the future. Perhaps I can look at other, more recent, natural disasters and analyze how well they would work in joint with ones I analyzed in this paper. I assume, if Haiti, or any other, low-income country, were to get hit by another devastating 7.0 or higher earthquake, the methods I researched and proposed would still be put into use and save the lives of many many people and improve upon there quality of life and willingness to survive. 

## References

[1] Pham, T. T. H., Apparicio, P., Gomez, C., Weber, C., & Mathon, D. (2014). Towards a rapid automatic detection of building   damage using remote sensing for disaster management: The 2010 Haiti earthquake. Disaster prevention and management, 23(1),     53-66.

[2] Yates, D., & Paquette, S. (2011). Emergency knowledge management and social media technologies: A case study of the 2010     Haitian earthquake. International journal of information management, 31(1), 6-13.

[3] Bengtsson, L., Lu, X., Thorson, A., Garfield, R., & Von Schreeb, J. (2011). Improved response to disasters and outbreaks     by tracking population movements with mobile phone network data: a post-earthquake geospatial study in Haiti. PLoS medicine,   8(8).



